# technical-assessment

## 0. What systems do you normally work in? Are you familiar with Jira and Confluence? Additionally, could you describe the tools you typically use in your daily work?
`Yes sure we are working everyday and following up our tasks on Jira board, write and get our services documentation from confluence and will list every tool i am using it for daily work.`
- **Jira**: We are using jira for creating our subtasks plus breaking down the epics (user stories) also following up everyone what he is doing and which the tasks that i can pick from it once finish my tasks.
- **Confluence**: We are using it to add the services documentation and make on it the POCs or something like documentation for every service to be used as a reference for us or for any new comer.
- **VSCode**: a code editor redefined and optimized for building and debugging modern web and cloud applications.
- **Docker Desktop**: we are using docker Desktop to provide the ability to package and run our application in a loosely isolated environment called a container.
- **github**: we use github to contribute to our application services repositories and allows us to create, store, manage and share our code branches and open PRs to be reviewed then merge it with the main then deploy it by drafting new release by adding new tag and start running the needed workflow based on which environment we need to deploy on it (test,stg or prod).
- **Postman**: we are using postman for testing our APIs so it allows creating better APIs—faster.
- **DBeaver**: it is a database tool for working with data. It supports all popular SQL databases like MySQL, MariaDB, PostgreSQL, and more. we using it to check database tables and for tracing or debugging an issue related to hte data or checking if data exist so DBeaver is a universal database management tool for everyone who needs to work with data in a professional way.
- **ArgoCD**: we use it for tracking deployed services versions if updated for last version based on last release or not to make sure that the deployment is completed plus checking on it the logs for services if something happened and we need to debug it .
-  **AWS-SSM*: it is a management service that helps us to save or store our environment variables and our secrets for test,stg,prod environments.
-  **datadog**: it is a tool for tracing or checking the logs for the running services for debugging and checking application performance and need to be integrated and configured for our service to can run it.

## 1. Are you acquainted with the SOLID principle? If so, could you provide a brief explanation?
`Yes sure, They are a set of rules and best practices to follow them while designing a class structure. So all the time we are trying to follow and achieve it as I believe that it is a topic that every developer should learn`
- **The Single Responsibility Principle**: states that a class should do one thing and therefore it should have only a single reason to change.
- **The Open-Closed Principle**: requires that classes should be open for extension and closed to modification.
- **The Liskov Substitution Principle**: states that subclasses should be substitutable for their base classes.
- **The Interface Segregation Principle**: states that many client-specific interfaces are better than one general-purpose interface. Clients should not be forced to implement a function they do no need.
- **The Dependency Inversion Principle**:  states that our classes should depend upon interfaces or abstract classes instead of concrete classes and functions.

## 2. What is Next.js, and how does it differ from Express? Can you discuss the concept of convention over configuration in relation to Node.js frameworks?
 `Next.js is a React framework for building full-stack web applications so it enables you to create high-quality web applications with the power of React components. It's not just a frontend or a backend framework; it's a blend of both, providing a comprehensive solution for building web applications.`
 - **next.js and express.js**: are two different frameworks that are used to build different sets of applications. While ExpressJs is a Node. js-based web application framework to build APIs and server-side applications, NextJs on the other hand is a react-based framework used for creating static websites and SEO optimizations. So Express is a minimalistic and flexible framework suitable for building lightweight and highly customizable web applications, while Next. js excels at server-side rendering and static site generation, making it a great choice for complex React-based applications.
 - **convention over configuration in Nodejs**: Node.js frameworks typically offer pre-built modules and libraries, equipping developers with a unique collection of reusable code that can solve common issues without reinventing the wheel. Following the "convention over configuration" principle, Node.js frameworks reduce the number of challenging decisions a developer has to make, thereby accelerating development cycles.

## 3. Could you explain what an event loop and event emitter are in the context of Node.js?
`Event loops, and event emitters are all important concepts in Node.js that work together to make it a powerful and efficient language.`
- **Event loop**: The event loop is a core part of Node.js that allows it to handle a large number of requests and events simultaneously. The event loop is a continuous loop that listens for events and executes the corresponding callback functions when those events occur. Events can include things like user input, network requests, and file system operations. When an event occurs, the event loop checks if there is a corresponding callback function attached to that event. If there is, the callback function is executed, allowing the program to respond to the event. If there isn’t, the event is simply ignored. The event loop ensures that the program remains responsive and can handle multiple requests and events at the same time.

- **Event emitter**: The event emitter is a built-in module in Node.js that allows you to create custom events and attach callback functions to those events. The event emitter provides a way to communicate between different parts of your program by allowing you to trigger custom events and execute functions in response to those events.

## 4. How would you go about identifying and addressing performance issues in a Node.js application?
`By debugging and deep testing we can catch any performance issue, So improving the performance of a Node.js application requires a multi-faceted approach that includes identifying and addressing performance bottlenecks, optimizing database queries, utilizing caching, reverse proxies, and load balancers, taking advantage of multiple cores, monitoring and tuning the application, and using best practices for development and deployment. For example using a profiler to identify performance bottlenecks or Using a production-ready web server like Express or Koa, instead of the built-in http module`

## 5. If an application suddenly experiences a slowdown or unresponsive behavior, what steps would you take to investigate and rectify the issue? Would you consider utilizing profilers and visualizing metrics in tools like Grafana?
`First will make a test cycle on all scenarios to catch where this is happening and add more logs to help me in debugging and tracing, Then will check the issue if related to query retrieval that need to be enhanced or adding something like indexing or cashing the response in frontend side or using redis caching to make retrieval faster, And can monitoring performance and the tracing from datadog APM and logs. also we can return the response as chunks if the response take more time or enhance the queries retrieval from database, Grafana is a tool for tracing like datadog so we can Dashboard anything. Observe everything. Query, visualize, alert on, and understand your data no matter where it’s stored. With Grafana you can create, explore, and share all of your data through beautiful, flexible dashboards`

## 6. In a scenario where a single Node.js app on a single instance is under heavy load, what measures could be implemented to further enhance performance? Have you worked with clustering in such contexts?
`Actually i didn't work before by clustering but i read about it sure and how node js achieve this by child processes and how apply something like CPU sharing and parallelism, So the cluster module allows you to create copies of your node process that each run your server code side by side in parallel.Clusters of Node.js processes can be used to run multiple instances of Node.js that can distribute workloads among their application threads. When process isolation is not needed, use the worker_threads module instead, which allows running multiple application threads within a single Node.js instance.`

## 7. When tasked with building RESTful services and APIs for a company, what would be your approach to getting started?
`Actually my main task for daily work is to design and develop RESTful APIs for mobile clients using, optimize APIs for performance and scalability and implement monitoring and logging solutions to track backend performance and troubleshoot issues, REST (Representational State Transfer) is an architectural style that defines a set of constraints and principles for building web services so we can use expressjs or nest js but i think nestJS is a rapidly growing Node.js framework gaining popularity for its robust architecture, TypeScript support, and extensive features for building scalable and maintainable applications.`

## 8. In your experience, when is it appropriate to use relational databases? Conversely, when would you opt for a NoSQL solution? Could you discuss your understanding of data modeling and SQL queries?
`Actually this is an important choice but it is based on our case, As when choosing a database, one of the most important decisions you need to make is whether to go for a SQL or a NoSQL database. SQL is widely used for data management in relational database management systems. The language is used to query relational databases, which are databases that recognize relationships between stored data items.NoSQL databases are non-relational (as opposed to SQL, which is relational). Crucially, NoSQL does not mean that these databases never use SQL. (There are NoSQL databases that can and do support SQL.) Instead, it’s best to think of NoSQL as not only SQL, SQL databases use tables with fixed columns (attributes) and rows (records). These databases follow specific rules regarding integrity and consistency.
NoSQL databases, however, dont stick to this rigid format. Instead for example document stores that store and encode data in documents in formats such as JSON, XML, YAML, and BSON. Anf finally neither SQL nor NoSQL is faster than the other overall. Rather, their speed depends on the context in which they are being used.`

## 9. If a query is performing poorly in a relational database management system, how would you diagnose and improve its performance?
`Actually i am always looking for ways to speed up my query runtime and reduce costs. I like to think of indexes as primary keys and mapping tables in SQL. In wide data tables, you often see identification codes or integers that map to another data table. This is an effective way of storing data because it allows you to easily query the wide table and join values back to another table, Using appropriate data types for columns in a database can significantly improve query performance. For example, using an integer data type for a column that contains numeric values can make queries run faster than using a text data type. Believe it or not, when exploring different datasets in your data warehouse, you don’t want to use a SELECT *. These types of queries are actually quite inefficient because you are choosing to view all fields in a dataset rather than just the ones you are interested in.`

## 10. Are you familiar with the term DevOps, and could you provide an overview of what it encompasses? Furthermore, could you share any relevant experience you've had in this area?
`Actually answer is yes, we are engaging with the devOps team to help us not to be blocked for anything as i can deploy and draft new release and create a tag then fire it to run the workflow the check the version if it is affected the ECRs and pods or not and also i can create the helm chart and add for it the environment variables that needed to add it in AWS SSM, So we everyday work and engage with the devOps team to make everything working fine`

## 11. Have you worked with cloud platforms such as AWS, Google Cloud, or Microsoft Azure? If so, could you elaborate on your experience?
`Yes i worked before by Microsoft Azure as i created pipeline to run on it javascript azure functions to encrypt the files and move it from container to another and again decrypt it, All this using Azure(Active Directory, Azure Functions, Storage Accounts, Key-vault, data-bricks). And for AWS i used it for building Mail Campaign Service to end mails for customers and get Metric Statistics for the mail actions by the customers so i used AWS SES to send email then get statistics and analysis for the actions after delivering it to the customer and running this by cron job in nodeJs so i integrated with nest-aws-sdk for config aws ses with the application`

## 12. What does CI/CD cover, and have you set up pipelines before? If yes, could you describe where and how you implemented them?
`Continuous integration (CI) refers to the practice of automatically and frequently integrating code changes into a shared source code repository. Continuous delivery and/or deployment (CD) is a 2 part process that refers to the integration, testing, and delivery of code changes.We are everyday using gitHub to integrate our code and pushing it and merging with main branch then we have an opportunity to engage with the deployment process also to facilitate and make our work deliver faster.`
